I've been a strength coach for more than
20 years, and the one thing that I've
learned is this: every person at every
stage of their lives needs [music] to
lift weights. Beginner, intermediate,
advanced, male, female, young or old,
>> [music]
>> the goal is the same. Strength training
is the foundation for a high quality of
life and longevity. And today, I'm going
to teach you how to do it properly from
the start. Now, I also know that most of
you guys watching me already train, and
I know the majority of my audience are
men.
>> [music]
>> But, here's the thing: every one of you
have women in your life who need this
message. Your mom, your partner, your
sister, your daughter, or your friends.
People who won't sit through a strength
seminar and don't follow strength
coaches online, but they still need to
know how to lift. They still need to
understand why heavy training matters
for [music] their health. And you can be
the person who helps them hear it. So,
this video isn't just for you. It's for
the people that you care about who
aren't yet lifting, but absolutely
should be. Before we [music] dive into
the practical steps, I want to show you
a message that's finally been said on a
large scale to women all around the
world. [music] It's a message that I've
been preaching for decades, and now it's
being validated by experts far outside
the strength sport world. Check out this
clip from Dr. Vonda Wright.
>> I want you to lift heavy weights.
Put down the little manby pamby pink
weights, please.
I want you to lift as heavy as your
bones will let you
for three to six reps. This is how you
build stem cells. This is how you build
mitochondria, which are the powerhouses,
and this is how you're not going to fall
down from a standing position and break
your hip.
>> Before I go any further, let me give you
a quick introduction so you understand
who you're listening to. Dr. Vonda
Wright is a board certified orthopedic
surgeon and sports medicine doctor who
specializes in high-performance aging
and women's health. She's worked with
professional athletes, she's led
research on mobility and bone health,
and she's written multiple books on how
women can stay strong and functional
across their lifespan. She's a
legitimate expert in this space, and
she's made a brilliant point that more
women need to hear. Lift heavy, work in
the three-to-six rep range, put down the
manby pamby pink weights. She wasn't
saying it to be dramatic. She was saying
it because the research on bone mineral
density is clear. If you want to build
strong, resilient bones, you need
meaningful load. Tiny dumbbells for high
reps don't produce the strain the bone
needs to remodel and get stronger, and I
agree with her completely. But, there's
context that people need before they
take this advice and run with it. I'm a
strength coach to some of the strongest
athletes on the planet, including the
world's strongest man. Strength comes
from lifting heavy weight, so the
question becomes how heavy? Once you
move beyond the beginner stage, the
research consistently points to loads
above 80% of your one-rep max as being
the most effective for building
strength. And most people can perform
roughly six reps with 80% of their max.
That's where the three-to-six rep range
comes from. It's not random, it's tied
directly to the loads that actually make
you stronger. Here's the reality,
though: the one-to-six rep range is a
great idea for building strength, but
not on every exercise. Different lifts
have different profiles and different
demands, and some movements are too
taxing or too high risk to perform with
extremely heavy loads and very low reps.
So, we choose specific exercises for
this style of training and apply it
where it makes sense. And we definitely
don't train this way all year round.
Heavy phases come in blocks. We use
periods of higher reps and higher
volumes to build work capacity, muscle
mass, and coordination, so that when we
phase the heavy work back in, the body
is prepared for it and can do it safely.
Now, let's talk about the audience Dr.
Wright is speaking to. She's speaking to
women at every stage of their lives,
whether they're younger, in midlife, or
later in life. The reality is all women
will eventually need to think seriously
about bone health and strength. So, this
message applies to every single one of
them. And for many of these women, this
is the first time that they're hearing
advice like lift heavy, and without
context, it can easily be misunderstood.
Lifting heavy is not the place you
start. It's a place that you build
towards. If you're an absolute beginner
with no lifting experience and no
guidance, trying to work at 80% of your
max for low reps is a recipe for stress,
fear, and probably injury. You start
light, and if the pink dumbbells are
right for you, that's fine. They're a
starting point. They teach you the
patterns, they build confidence, they
start the process. They're not the end
goal. The end goal is progression. You
increase the load, you improve your
technique, you earn the right to go
heavy. Now, let's talk specifically
about bone mineral density, because this
is where people really need clarity.
Improving bone density is not a global
adaptation, it's local. Bones get
stronger exactly where you load them. If
you want stronger hips, you need lower
body weight-bearing work. If you want a
stronger spine, you need axial loading.
If you want stronger arms, you need
meaningful pressing and pulling. You
can't leg press your way into stronger
forearms, you can't bicep curl your way
into stronger hips. Bone adapts to the
force that you put through it. No force,
no stimulation, no stimulus, no
adaptation. And when it comes to
improving bone density in the spine,
axial loading is key. The exercises that
provide meaningful axial load are
usually free weight movements. So,
working towards barbell lifts may not be
the terrible, dangerous idea that some
people make them out to be. If anything,
they're some of the most effective tools
that we have for loading the spine
safely and progressively, but you don't
start with a barbell on day one. You
build towards it. Eventually, you need
real load traveling through the skeleton
if you want the spine to adapt. So,
here's the full message that people need
to hear. Heavy lifting works. It builds
strength, it supports bone health, it's
absolutely worth pursuing, but it has to
be progressed intelligently. You need
phases, you need higher rep work, you
need skill development, you need enough
muscle mass to support the loads that
you're trying to lift, and you need a
program designed around the specific
bones and tissues that you're trying to
strengthen. Take the principle lift
heavy, but apply it with intelligence,
structure, and progression. That's how
beginners learn and stay safe. That's
how experienced lifters keep
progressing, and that's how women
genuinely improve their bone mineral
density and long-term strength. So, now
here's the problem. We understand that
we need to lift heavy weights, we also
understand that we need to teach
ourselves how to eventually get there,
but most people still have no idea how
to actually do any of this. The good
news is, I'm going to break it down as
simply as possible. I'm going to teach
you the fundamentals that work at every
level so that you can walk into the gym
and know exactly what you're doing. The
first thing that you need to think about
is this: what exercises should you
actually be doing? For the beginners,
the simplest and most effective strategy
is to train the whole body each session.
High-level lifters often split their
training into body parts, but that's
because they're advanced. They need a
lot of concentrated work on each muscle
to keep progressing. But, when you're
training for strength and building a
capable, resilient body, it makes far
more sense to think in terms of movement
patterns, not isolated muscle groups.
So, instead of thinking about training
your pecs and lats, think about pushing
and pulling. Instead of legs and glutes,
think about squat and bend. As a
beginner, you don't need to hammer one
muscle with endless sets. If you do, you
might be so sore that it interferes with
the rest of your week. Understand this
clearly: muscle soreness is not the
indicator of a successful session. You
can train well and not be sore at all.
Soreness can be feedback, but it
shouldn't be the goal. Sometimes it can
reassure you that the muscles that you
intended to target are actually doing
the work. But, when soreness becomes
excessive to the point where you can't
sit on the toilet, can't walk properly,
or it interferes with the techniques in
the next sessions, it stops being useful
and becomes counterproductive. It's also
worth knowing that soreness often shows
up when you introduce a new stimulus.
Because of that, whenever I introduce a
new program, I deliberately start
lighter or reduce the volume to keep the
soreness manageable. So, instead of
splitting your week into single muscle
group days, my favorite beginner
strategy is to train the whole body in
one session, and you can do that with
just four movements: squat, bend, push,
and pull. These four patterns cover the
entire body and build real strength,
coordination, and confidence. The next
priority is load management. There's an
ongoing debate on how hard you should
train. Some lifters say that you should
always train to failure, others say you
should always leave reps in reserve. The
truth lies somewhere in the middle. You
should train to failure sometimes, and
you should leave reps in reserve
sometimes. One of the most important
things that you can learn as a lifter is
your own limitations, and you can't
learn your limits if you've never pushed
them. As a beginner, it's not
recommended that you train so hard that
you miss reps or your technique falls
apart. Technique is one of the most
important investments that you can make.
If you're pushing too close to failure,
especially early on, there's no way
you'll be able to focus on moving well.
Now, I'm not saying you need to move
perfectly, nobody does. Movement
variability is totally normal, but you
should aim to move as well as you can,
and that means leaving reps in reserve
in the early stages so that you can
actually focus on learning good
patterns. Now, to save you from any of
the guesswork, I'm giving you my
beginner's guide, an ebook that I
normally charge $99 for. I created it so
beginners can walk into any commercial
gym and know exactly what to do without
feeling out of place. All I ask is that
you commit to it for four weeks. Follow
it properly, watch what happens. This
program builds strength, muscle, and
coordination across your entire body,
and sets you up to eventually train
properly for strength. It's a very
simple program, three sets per movement
pattern using the appropriate rep
ranges, the easier variations that you
can perform confidently in the gym, and
working at the right intensity without
pushing your body to breaking point. And
remember something important: this
program isn't just for you, it's for the
people that you care about. If you've
got a mom who needs to get stronger, a
dad who's never lifted but should, a
partner who's intimidated by the gym, a
son or a daughter that needs guidance,
anyone in your life that would benefit
from getting strong and doesn't know
where to start, this program is for
them. Give them this program and take
the first step. Strength is for everyone
and the people that you love need it
just as much as you do. And if you want
this program, just click the link in the
description and I'll send it to you.